hi my name is gustavo nunes gretchen and
i want to talk to you about this idea
of using a function for its name and not
to call or invoke it
i'm going to demonstrate this
experimental package called fix args
that shows some of these patterns
the point of the talk is to focus on the
idea rather than on the specific
implementation in the package
to get started let's use an example
based on v-cat which is how we
concatenate vectors
to concatenate a vector of vectors we
can use a higher order function
reduce and we get the result that we
want
let's do the same thing but now use an
anonymous function instead of directly
calling vcat
and we can time the two
in summary the second one is 500 times
slower and that's because
totally different code is running in
each case
if we look at the methods of reduce we
do see that there's a special case
for vcat there are two key features that
get this to work
one is multiple dispatch and the other
is that the function is encoded in the
type domain
each function is its own type without
these features we would need to name
that special code reduce underscore vcat
or perhaps flatten personally the first
spelling is better because it combines
existing and meaningful names instead of
introducing an ad hoc name
calling reduce with vcat might not even
call vcat
vcat is used as a name this matters a
lot in julia because we work hard to
find
the right meaning for a given function
so that generic programming can work
and i think that we should keep reusing
these names where possible
because naming things is hard the
original motivation for fix args was to
generalize fix
1 and fixed 2 in base what are those
let's use equals equals as an example
f1 and f2 are basically the same
function
for a given input they compute the same
output which is whether the input is
equal to 50.
notice that the type of f1 is this fixed
2 type and that the equals equals
function
and the type of 50 are both part of the
type
f2 has this special name which is not
something i recommend dispatching on
we want f1 and f2 to behave identically
and they do when we pass them to find
first
but i can tell you that the first one is
a constant time operation and the second
one is linear in the number of elements
in this range here
it's the same thing again there is a
fine first method defined for this
special case
and it's what you would expect this is
one thing i love about julia
you can imagine a plotting library that
supports evenly spaced ticks and
unevenly spaced ticks
you can use an object like this to
represent the evenly spaced ticks
and if you have code written in terms of
fine first and functions like it
you can perform efficient operations on
that representation
while still supporting the unevenly
spaced ticks so you can handle the
general case without affecting
performance in the special case
fix args provides a generalization of
fix 1 and fix 2 in a few ways
you can use functions of any positional
erraty and any number of
its arguments can be bound a function
can also have its keyword arguments
bound
and you can represent call expressions
on their own not just partially applied
functions
a quick example of where fixing keyword
arguments would already be useful
is in the is approx partial function in
base all other partial functions
use fixed two but this one cannot
because the keyword arguments matter
so do we want to encode land the
calculus and types is it ever useful to
fix
all of the arguments of a function to me
the answer is definitely yes
this will be a silly example but let's
consider the division function
if you fix its two arguments that looks
a lot like a rational number to me
so for example to represent a half and
here's where we start using the package
we can use this x quote macro to create
these objects
if you multiply these two objects
together we don't know how to do that
and we get a method error
but we can define the method using other
macros
so here we define a method for
multiplying t divided by t
by t divided by t and half times a half
now gives you a representation for a
quarter where you have here the one and
the four
notice that the dollar sign is used to
escape the x coding
without the dollar sign you defer all
the function calls including the
multiplications not just the division
where does the connection between
rational and division happen in base
well what happens in this method in fix
args you can use the function xeval to
evaluate the form
the type already encodes that it's the
division of two things
i want to compare some low-level details
first of all the size of this object is
the same as the corresponding rational
object
even the memory layout is identical
let's look at the code generated to
convert this rational to a float
it's also identical that said it is not
a drop in replacement for rational
because while rational subtypes number
the call
object and fix arcs cannot
using this instead of based irrational
seems pretty silly and confusing but
there are some possible benefits
some users want to have different types
for the numerator in the denominator and
i think a perfect example for this
is something like a fixed point number
where the denominator is encoded in the
type
there are more examples in the
documentation but i'll give you a
glimpse that we use this quadruple colon
s to mark this argument as static
and then the value here is in the type
domain
there is a kind of combination of
structural and nominal typing here
because we avoid choosing names like
rational num and then
the fields can be distinguished by the
role they play with respect to the
function
only the function needs a name and the
rest is determined structurally
the same point can be made differently
if we x quote an identity function
we get this value every time whereas if
we create a lambda function
we get things that do not compare equal
to each other even though they are
structurally identical
and in case you're wondering fixed args
does support all sorts of nested lambda
expressions correctly as you'd hope
there are some existing patterns that
this relates to because any eager
function
can have a lazy representation now so
base that generator
could be a lazy representation of map
many of the types in the iterators
module
are in one-to-one correspondence with
functions and that correspondence can be
made explicit using fixed arts
having a concise name is still valuable
and so an alias can be used to keep
existing method definitions relatively
clean
literal powers in julia lower especially
for good reason
and that could be replaced by something
more general perhaps like using this
where again the static annotation shows
up
this is the same pattern as what happens
with broadcasting in julia
where instead of an xevalcall we have
materialize
this pattern shows up in other packages
like lazy arrays
and lazy sets
i want to be clear that this is
different from quoting expressions in
base
because there you would get a bunch of
symbols and with fix args you actually
get the evaluation of
x the division and the y it's also not
the same as something like the term type
in symbolic utils
where the types for the function and the
arguments are intentionally marked as
any so that the compiler does not
generate a bunch of code for different
types
i don't recommend this but if you really
wanted to you could define the imaginary
unit as being a lazy square root of
negative one
you can't evaluate that but you can
represent it symbolically now and you
can use that to represent complex
numbers
it even has the same memory layout as
the complex numbers built into julia
note that all of these expressions will
have different types and that can be a
downside though you could try to
normalize it
speaking of downsides trying to do a lot
of code reviews like unifying literal
power with broadcasting
probably increases coupling and has
unintentional effects
the types here get pretty large and that
can influence compile times
also if you're not careful you can get
lots of method ambiguities
thanks